[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>For nearly 200
years, the Knights
of the Temple of
Solomon were the epitome
of Christianity's Medieval
Crusade against Islam.
The Templars had
maintained a standing army
and had constructed
fortifications
throughout the Holy Land, all
financed by a vast business
empire created in
Western Europe.
But in year 1291, the
Islamic Mamluks of Egypt
had finally driven the
Templars and all the Crusaders
from Palestine.
The Templars' entire
reason for being
was the defense of
Christian holy sites.
What role could there now
be for the warrior monks?
If they had no role, why did
they still need such wealth?
The triumph of Islam over the
Christians in the Holy Land
was a blow to Western
European prestige,
but not a total catastrophe.
Enthusiasm for
major crusades had
declined over the last
century, as the Christians
had suffered defeat
after defeat.
To many, there must have
been some reason why
God had seemingly
abandoned the Crusaders.
The sins of pride,
arrogance, and avarice
were accusations the Templars
had faced many times.
But the Templars had never
once given up the fight
against the Muslims.
The Grand Master
himself had died
in their last battle at Acre,
and the remaining Templars
had all fought to the death.
For the Order as a
whole, the annihilation
of the Christian state was
merely a temporary setback.
>>The Templars fought
very gallantly to defend
Acre in 1291.
And even though they were
driven back on Cyprus
in the course of
the 1290s, there's
plenty of evidence to show
that they were continuing
to maintain the
cause of the Crusade.
They hired fleets.
They attacked the Egyptian
and Syrian mainlands.
They attempted to establish
a base on the Island of Ruad,
off of Tortosa.
It was unsuccessful, but
the will was there to do it.
>>Neither did the Templars
halt their recruiting
and fundraising activities.
Crusading enthusiasm
had dampened in Europe
but had, by no means, died.
The Templars had no difficulty
attracting new recruits.
>>An individual's
motivation for joining
one of the military
orders, I am quite sure,
was almost entirely religious.
So if he succeeded in
saving his soul, then,
from his point of view,
he was victorious.
The fact that he had lost
a battle, lost a fight,
that the Crusader
states had fallen
was-- I won't say secondary--
it was a disaster.
But as far as the individual
motivation of a recruit
is concerned, if he fought
and died in the cause
that he believed in
and went to heaven,
then he, as an individual,
was victorious.
>>With a new headquarters in
Cyprus, new recruits, a highly
productive network still
providing immense funds,
the Order of the
Temple continued
its 200-year-old
struggle against Islam.
After each catastrophe,
the resilient Templars
had always regrouped and
returned to the fray.
In the early hours
of October 13, 1307,
the officials of Philip the
Fair, the king of France,
suddenly arrested the
Templars in the lands which
the king controlled
and charged them
with a variety of
heretical crimes:
of obscenities, of the
worship of an idol.
And very quickly
extracted confessions
from many of the Templars that
had been arrested at that time.
>>The charges brought
against the Templars
could not possibly
be more serious.
They included treason with the
Muslims, worshipping an idol,
denying Jesus Christ,
spitting on the cross,
sleeping with the devil,
eating the ashes of their dead,
impregnating virgins, and
various homosexual activities.
If the Templar knights
were found guilty
of any one of these crimes,
they would be burned alive.
More than 5,000 Templars
throughout France
had been arrested in a highly
coordinated dawn sweep.
Even the Grand Master of
the Order of the Temple,
James of Molay,
had been captured.
And he, too, had confessed
to many of the accusations.
Could one of the most respected
orders of the church really
have been a secret society
of devil worshippers?
At the same time as the arrests,
Philip, the King of France,
had seized all the Templar
lands and properties,
and urged the crowned heads
of Europe to do the same.
But not all of
them were convinced
of the Templars' guilt.
>>Those rulers who were not
linked to the French monarchy
were very, very
skeptical, as were
many independent commentators.
The Italians, in particular,
who wrote about it at the time,
were quite convinced there was
a financial motive behind it.
And we have to take
their view seriously.
Nobody knew more about
money than the Italians
in the early 14th century.
So there was
widespread skepticism.
Edward II of England,
for instance,
said that he simply
did not believe it.
That these had been gallant
defenders of the Holy Land
and important servants of
the English crown, and that
he found the whole thing
impossible to believe
and quite astounding.
>>It was well-known
that the French crown
was in severe
financial difficulties.
In the preceding years, the
king had debased the coinage,
expelled the Lombard
bankers, and confiscated
all properties of the Jews.
Philip was exceptionally pious
and probably even believed
the accusations brought
against the Templars.
If they were true, it was
his duty to purify his realm.
The arrest of the
Templars, however,
was a long-awaited
opportunity for the king
to assert his dominance over
an increasingly weak papacy.
One notable aspect
of the trial is
that the reigning pope, Clement
V, wasn't told in advance.
So it came as much
as a surprise to him
as it did to the Templars.
And he was very affronted by it.
He was, perhaps, less concerned
about the fate of the Templars
than he was about his
own authority, I think.
And therefore, having seen
that the event had occurred,
he was most interested in
reasserting his own position,
vis a vis, a powerful secular
monarch, like Phillip IV.
So he actually tried
to take over the trial,
having found that he
couldn't really reverse it.
And this is the
reason that the trial
spread to other countries,
because the pope ordered
a general arrest of the
Templars in other countries
in order to try to find the
truth of the charges that
were brought against the Order.
>>The intervention
of the pope was
what the Templars
had been waiting for.
All immediately withdrew
their damning confessions,
as it was a custom of the
time for an accused man
to confess and
later retract when
he was back on safe ground.
But the Templars were blind
to the political realities.
Europe was seeing a massive
power struggle, nothing less
than the birth of
a nation state.
As the King of France
attempted to limit
the centuries-old
political influence
of the church in France,
nothing would stand in his way.
King Philip was set on
destroying the Templars
and had launched an enormous
public relations offensive,
circulating the
sensational confessions
throughout his kingdom.
To the people of medieval
France and Europe,
news of the blasphemous
Templar confessions
was profoundly shocking.
Even today, many people still
believe that these confessions
must have contained at
least a grain of truth.
>>Some historians
have actually believed
that the Templars were guilty
of the crimes of which they
were accused.
And they point to the
large number of confessions
that were made, and, indeed,
the great detail that one
can see in the confessions
of participation
in obscene and
blasphemous rights, which
the Templars were accused of.
I think, though, for
those of us looking back
on the 20th century,
the century is
scarred by
governmental pressures,
both mental and physical.
In particular, a
century in which torture
has been used
extensively by most
of the governments of the world.
We, I think, can
have a good deal
less faith in
confessions extracted
under that kind of pressure.
And indeed, most
of these Templars
were tortured in all kinds of
horrendous and painful ways.
And not one of us could
say that we wouldn't
be forced to confess almost
anything, perhaps anything,
if we were put under
sufficient pressure.
>>The confessions were
damning evidence enough.
But following two centuries
of suspicion and rumor,
they found fertile ground in
the minds of many Europeans.
The Templars' vast
wealth, their failure
to defend the Holy Land,
their unusual relationship
with the Muslims
and Islamic culture
was enough to convince
the pope that there
may be some truth
in the allegations.
But more importantly
for the papacy,
its own prestige was at stake.
The pope had seen no
option but to abandon
the Order of the Temple.
The Templars had few
among their ranks
who were capable of
defending themselves
against such abominable charges.
>>The fact that the Templars
regarded themselves and were
regarded by others
as unqualified
in strictly religious
or doctrinal matters
was not a problem
in the early years.
But I suspect that it laid
them open to criticism later.
Or at least, it was like
a chink in their armor.
The fact that they
had always claimed
not to be scholarly
in religious matters
meant that they could be accused
of deviant religious beliefs
or activities.
And they would find it
very, very difficult
to justify themselves
or to explain this.
Because in the past, they had
never claimed any knowledge.
So in a sense, their only
excuse was ignorance.
>>The trial of the
Templars took five years.
Midway through,
the King of France
had 54 Templars burned
as relapsed heretics,
quickly ending a brief but
spirited Templar defense.
Finally, in March 1312, five
years after the arrests,
the pope announced the
abolition of the Order
of the Temple of Solomon.
All of their vast
lands and treasure
were handed over to the
Knights Hospitaller,
much to the fury
of the French king.
Philip immediately
sued the Hospitallers
for the legal
costs of the trial.
All of Europe was stunned.
The abolition of the
Templars was unprecedented.
Many still refused to
believe the Templars' guilt.
But Europe's crowns could
not resist the rich pickings
of the Templar properties.
>>In England, for
instance, Edward II
took over the Templar lands
and the Templar treasury,
and he made assignments on
these lands and on this money.
And though, in the
long-term, once the Templars
were suppressed in
1312, the property
was transferred to
the Hospitallers.
We know from Hospitaller
records that the Order
of the Hospitaller was still
trying to get hold of lands
that Edward II had assigned
to political friends
and political favorites
of his in the late 1330s.
We know from
Hospitaller inventories
that that's the case.
So once the process had
started, it was equally damaging
to the temple in those countries
where the monarchs had,
in the first place, been quite
skeptical of their guilt.
>>In the year 1314, the
two most senior Templars,
the last Grand Master, James of
Molay and Geoffrey of Charnay
were burned alive
as relpsed heretics.
Ordinary knights who
confessed and repented
were given prison
sentences and were then
allowed to join other orders.
Over nearly 200
years of warfare,
20,000 knights had
died fighting Islam.
But in the end, it was
Christianity itself
that destroyed the Order
of the Temple of Solomon.
Today, little remains
of the Order's empire.
Ruins of enormous
castles, a few remnants
of the vast European
network, which
once owned more than
900 perceptories.
However, modern warfare,
trading, shipping,
communications,
banking, and farming all
owe something to the innovations
of the Knights Templar.
>>The history of the
Templars, taken overall,
is a very neat story
of rise and fall,
of initial popularity, of
initial humility, which
turned into over-weaning
power, arrogance,
and avarice-- ultimately,
leading to their trial.
In fact, I don't
think that that is
a very good way of
looking at their history.
I think that we are far too
much influenced by the fact
that they were brought to trial.
All the time,
therefore, if one is
trying to examine the
history of the Templars
in the course of the
12th and 13th centuries,
one must try to do it without
bearing in mind the trial that
occurred.
To try to think as if
the trial never happened
and then look at the
history of the Templars.
And I think one would find it
would look rather different.
Because in my view, the trial
was not a direct consequence
of any actions or
omissions that could
be laid at the Templars'
door in the period
from the 1290s onwards.
I think that the action against
the Templars in the trial
was largely generated
by circumstances
within France, and in
particular, circumstances
within the Capetian government
at that particular time.
>>The story of the
Knights Templar
does not end with the
destruction of the Order
and the immolation of James of
Molay and Geoffrey of Charnay.
The dramatic rise
and fall of one
of the most powerful
institutions of the day
has fascinated people for
the last seven centuries.
>>The fact that they were
brought to trial in 1307
and eventually
suppressed in 1312
inevitably colors the
way that we look at them.
And then, in turn, the way that
they've been written about,
in particular, I think, by
Sir Walter Scott in the novel
"Ivanhoe," which was
published in 1819,
has helped to reinforce the idea
of the arrogant, overconfident,
overbearing Templar who
was, nevertheless, also
the possessor of mysterious
esoteric anti-Christian
secrets.
>>Soon after the abolition
of the Knights Templar,
legends grew up of escaped
Templars, secret societies,
hidden treasure,
mysterious scrolls,
and strange connections to
some of the world's greatest
religious icons.
>>One of the reasons, I think,
for the continuing fascination
with the Templars is that they
have a long after-history,
which begins almost immediately
with the burning of James
of Molay and Geoffrey
of Charnay in Paris
as relapsed heretics in 1314.
Various chroniclists
claimed that Molay
had brought a curse down
upon the Capetian house,
and in particular,
upon Philip the Fair,
as well as upon
Clement V, calling
upon the vengeance
of God to bring them
before the tribunal of
heaven within the year.
Now, of course, it was
easy for them to say this,
because both Philip the Fair
and Clement V did actually
die within the year.
So one could make it look as
if that really did make sense.
But that-- there were
those dramatic ideas
that one sees in near
contemporary chronicles
have since been
embroidered and developed
by other people
seeking sensationalism,
seeking a story that
continues after the Templars'
sensational end.
In my view, there
is no substance
in any of these stories.
But that doesn't
stop them being used
by different people in different
periods for their own purposes.
And this continues right
down to the present day.
>>One of the most persistent
legends associated
with the Templars
is their connection
with the Shroud of Turin,
which, for many years,
was believed to have been the
burial shroud of Jesus Christ.
>>In the 1970s and 1980s,
when historians and scientists
were arguing about
the authenticity
of this particular
relic, they needed
to provide it-- if it was to be
seen as authentic-- they needed
to provide it with a
scientific providence.
But they also needed to provide
it with a continuous history.
And there, there were
really large gaps.
One of those gaps was filled,
in some people's view,
by the idea that it
was the Templars who
had held the Turin shroud.
That they had seized it
during the Fourth Crusade
sack of Constantinople in 1204.
That they had kept it
secret among their treasures
throughout the 13th century.
That that was the
origin of the accusation
that they worshipped
idols, that they had
make many copies of it, and it
had been the subject of a cult
within the Order.
And that, before the Templars
were finally suppressed,
they had managed
to smuggle it away
into the possession
of the Charnay family,
who were the ones who exhibit it
in the late 14th century, when
it seems to reappear again.
So this seemed like
a plausible theory
as to what had happened
to the shroud in the 13th
and 14th centuries while
also, rather neatly,
explaining the accusation
of idol worship
against the Templars.
The problem with the
theory is that there's not
one shred of evidence
to support it.
It is entirely theory, and
it's totally incredible
and quite unbelievable.
>>The legend of the Order
of the Temple of Solomon
lives on through the activities
of thousands of modern Templar
societies all over the world.
Many have charitable aims.
And some claim an unbroken
link to the last Templars.
But it is the Order's role
in the Free Masonry Movement
that has done most to give the
Templars worldwide recognition.
>>I don't think that, for the
rest of the medieval period,
and really, very much into
the 16th and 17th centuries,
there's massive interest
in the Templars.
Where it really revises
is in the 18th century
with the growth of
Masonic orders, who
liked to believe that
they were directly
linked to the Temple of
Solomon and to the Masons who
had supposedly built
the Temple of Solomon.
And in this sense, they looked
towards a providence associated
with institutions that had
lived in those buildings
on the Temple Mount, which
the Crusaders had thought
had actually been the
Temple of Solomon.
And of course, they
lighted upon Templars
as part of that early history.
Given that these Masonic
Orders also sought a providence
for themselves, as most
new institutions do,
it seemed logical
to see the Templars
as being part of that
system of esoteric ideas
and secret ideas,
which they liked
to believe that they
were guardians of.
And which they
might have believed
were suppressed by the
regime of Philip the Fair
and the papal monarchy, as
represented by Clement V.
So I think that the real
revival in Templar interest
comes as a consequence of
the Masons, particularly
the German Masons, from
about a 1760s onwards.
>>Many of the
Templar legends begin
with the Order's
occupation of the temple
platform in Jerusalem.
And some people believe
the Templar knights
must have excavated
beneath the platform.
Here the Templars
are supposed to have
found, at one time or another,
not just the esoteric secrets
of King Solomon himself, but
even the Ark of the Covenant.
But there are several
problems with these theories.
>>The Crusaders actually
called it Solomon's stable.
And really, although this name
has no base from architecture
or historical point of view,
because that site, as it stands
today, has nothing to
do with Prophet Solomon.
We know that Solomon
developed Jerusalem, but not
that site or that area exactly.
Although, the structure,
as it stands today,
especially the bases are Roman,
while the upper courses is
purely Islamic and from
the Umayyad Dynasty.
>>One Templar legend is that
their vast treasure, together
with any esoteric secrets they
may or may not have discovered,
escaped the clutches
of the French king.
For decades, the discovery
of the lost Templar gold
and the lost secrets have been
the ambition of many a treasure
seeker.
Rosslyn Chapel in
Scotland, which
is the heart of
Scottish Free Masonry,
is also believed by many to hold
those Templar treasures which
must have alluded
the king of France.
>>When the Templars
were arrested in 1307,
the officials of
Philip the Fair very
carefully inventoried
all their possessions.
And they also took over the
temple fortress and bank
to the north of Paris.
So it seems very unlikely any
substantial part of the Templar
possessions was missed
by these people.
I don't think there's
any secret treasure.
I think it's much more mundane
and straightforward than that.
And I think, simply, that the
officials of Philip the Fair
took over the
Templar possessions
that they could
lay their hands on,
which was most of what the
Templars possessed in France.
>>The legend of
the Knights Templar
expands every year as new
theories are published,
each seeking to
prove conclusively
that the Templars really are
connected to history's most
famous names and places.
At one time or
another, the Templars
have been associated
with not just
the Ark of the Covenant
and the Holy Grail,
but even the
discovery of America,
a century before Columbus.
[MUSIC PLAYING]